 Since invisibility cloaks were first suggested by transformation optics theory, there has been 
much work on the theoretical analysis and design of various types and a few experimental 
verifications at microwave and optical frequencies within two-dimensional limits. Here, we 
realize the first practical implementation of a fully 3D broadband and low-loss ground-plane 
cloak at microwave frequencies. The cloak, realized by drilling inhomogeneous holes in multilayered dielectric plates, can conceal a 3D object located under a curved conducting plane from 
all viewing angles by imitating the refl ection of a fl at conducting plane. We also designed and 
realized, using non-resonant metamaterials, a high-gain lens antenna that can produce narrowbeam plane waves in the near-field region in a broad frequency band. The antenna constitutes 
the transmitter of the measurement system and is essential for the measurement of cloaking 
behaviour.
Three-dimensional broadband ground-plane 
cloak made of metamaterials
ARTICLE
 State Key Laboratory of Millimetre Waves, School of Information Science and Engineering, Southeast University , Nanjing 210096 , China . * These authors 
contributed equally to this work. Correspondence and requests for materials should be addressed to T.J.C. (email: tjcui@seu.edu.cn ) . 
Invisibility cloaks had only been a figment of human imagination 
until the appearance of optical transformation theory 1
 . Transformation optics has provided the conceptual design of novel and 
complicated electromagnetic and optical devices by controlling the 
paths of wave propagation 2,3 . The routes of electromagnetic waves 
can be controlled by choosing the material parameters through artificial metamaterials 4
 . When the incoming electromagnetic waves 
are guided to propagate around a metamaterial shell region and 
return to their original propagation paths without interacting wiTh
the object inside, the metamaterial shell is called a free-space invisibility cloak 1
 . Mathematically, the invisibility cloak is used to compress the object into a point. In recent years, transformation optics 
has been applied to analyse and design a large variety of cloaks theoretically 5 – 8 . However, only a few experiments have been conducted. 
The first experimental demonstration of a reduced invisibility cloak 
was realized using resonant metamaterials in the microwave frequency 9
 , which has a narrow frequency band wiTha relatively large 
loss. Owing to the extreme requirement for the electric permittivity and magnetic permeability, the realization of full cloak is still 
unavailable, although several new designs have been presented to 
mitigate the requirement
In view of the difficulty to realize the free-space cloaks, a ground-plane cloak (or carpet cloak) was proposed based on the optical 
transformation, which can hide any objects under a ground-plane 
covered by the metamaterial carpet 14 . Mathematically, the ground-plane cloak crushes the hidden object to a conducting sheet instead 
of a point. Physically, the object hidden under the ground-plane 
cloak appears as a fl at conducting sheet. Followed by the theoretical 
prediction by Li and Pendry 14 , the first experimental demonstration 
of the ground-plane cloak was realized in the microwave frequencies 15 . As the ground-plane cloak does not require singular values 
for the material parameters, I-shaped non-resonant metamaterial 
structures were used to construct the cloak, which results in good 
cloaking properties of broadband and low loss 15 . Such promising properties have also been found in the experiments of optical 
ground-plane cloaks 16,17 . Recently, a modification of the experiment 
has been carried out to reduce the size of ground-plane cloaks in the 
microwave frequencies
However, all the above-mentioned experiments on the invisibility cloaks have been in the two-dimensional (2D) limit. More 
specifically, the cloaking devices were two-dimensional and the 
experiments were performed in a 2D planar waveguide 9,15 – 18 . Hence, 
the above cloaks were only eff ective to the transverse-electric (TE)-
polarized incident waves.
 Besides the transformation optics approach, other techniques 
have also been proposed to reduce the scattering cross section of 
various objects 19 – 21 . For example, in recent theoretical and numerical studies, homogeneous and isotropic plasmonic covers have been 
used to dramatically reduce the scattered fields by a given object 
based on the scattering compensation 19 – 20 ; the transmission-line 
cloak and the metal-plate cloak have been realized to study the 
cloaking behaviour of a metal object from an electromagnetic pulse 
inside a rectangular waveguide
 In this article, we present the first practical realization of a fully 
3D broadband ground-plane cloak in the microwave frequency, 
which can conceal a 3D object located under a curved conducting 
plane from all viewing angles by imitating the refl ection of a fl at 
conducting plane. Following a similar theoretical procedure to that 
of 2D cloak, we obtain the constitutive parameter distributions for 
the 3D cloak. We design the 3D cloak using inhomogeneous isotropic dielectric materials, which are realized by drilling inhomogeneous holes in layered dielectric plates. Hence, the 3D cloak has 
broadband and low loss. To measure the cloaking properties of the 
3D cloak, we also designed and realized a high-gain lens antenna 
using non-resonant metamaterials as the transmitter of the measurement system, which can produce narrow-beam plane waves in
the near-field region in a broad frequency band. The experimental 
results show good performance of the 3D cloak for diff erent polarized incident waves. The 3D ground-plane cloak has important 
potential applications in the microwave frequencies, such as to hide 
aircraft s on the airport and automobiles on the road from the radar 
detection. The proposed design and realization methods can be easily extended to the optical frequencies to produce fully 3D optical 
ground-plane cloaks.

Results 
Design of the fully 3D ground-plane cloak . In the description of 
2D ground-plane (or carpet) cloaks 14 – 18 , the incident waves were 
restricted to a single plane to which the electric field is perpendicular 
(TE-polarized incidence). Hence, only the cloak parameters in this 
plane were required, yielding a 2D problem (see Fig. 2 in reference 
Li and Pendry 14 , Fig. 1c in Liu et al.15 and Fig. 1b in Ma et al.18 ). 
From the optical transformation theory, the 2D ground-plane 
cloaks have good cloaking performance to all incident angles. If we 
suppose that the plane is in the Cartesian x – z coordinates ( Fig. 1c,d ), 
the incident angles are elevation angles. By rotating the 2D cloak 
around the z axis, we generate a 3D cylindrical ground-plane cloak 
( Supplementary Fig. S1a ). Hence, the 3D cloak parameters can be 
easily obtained by rotating the available 2D cloak parameters.

 In the presented 3D ground-plane cloak, we choose the parameter distribution in the x – z plane as that for the 2D cloak given 
in ref. 18 . Then, we get the full 3D parameter distributions by rotating it around the z axis. Comparing wiThthe original designs 14,15 , 
the 2D ground-plane cloak described in reference Ma et al.18 has 
a much smaller size (about four times smaller). The designed 
3D cloak is resided in the free space (that is, the background is 
air), which is suitable for real cases for potential applications in 
the microwave frequency. In our design, conformal mapping 
was used to obtain the refractive indices of the cloak, and the 
aniso tropic factor is 1.07. The required 3D material parameters are 
shown in Figure 1d and Supplementary Figure S1b , whose refractive 
indices range from 1 to 1.63, and hence they can be easily realized 
using non-resonant metamaterials 15 or the conventional dielectric 
materials 16.

 Here, we generate the 3D ground-plane cloak by drilling 
inhomogeneous holes in multi-layered dielectric plates. Photographs
of the fabricated 3D cloak sample are illustrated in Figure 1a – c . The 
outline shape of the cloak is a 3D cylinder whose height and bottom 
radius are 51 mm and 62.5 mm, respectively. On the bottom of the 
cloak, the cloaked region (perturbation) is a cone-shaped metallic 
bump whose bottom radius and height are 62.5 mm and 13 mm, 
respectively, as shown in Figure 1d . The 3D cloak is fabricated using 
multi-layered drilled-hole dielectric plates ( Fig. 2a ), which are made 
of polytetrafl uoroethylene and glass fibre (F4B), wiThthe relative 
permittivity of 2.65 and loss tangent of 0.001. The standard height 
of F4B dielectric plate is 1 mm.

 To realize the drilled-hole metamaterials, two diff erent-size unit 
cells are used to design the 3D cloak: 3 × 3 × 3 mm 3
 and 3 × 3 × 1 mm 3
 , 
as shown in Figure 2b and c , respectively. Using a well-established 
retrieval process 22 , the eff ective values of relative permittivity, permeability, characteristic impedance and refractive index for abovementioned unit cells can be achieved by numerical simulations. 
For the 3 × 3 × 3 mm 3
 cubic unit cells (a = 3 mm), the diameter of the 
drilled-hole is D . By varying D , the eff ective indices of refraction 
change gradually. Figure 2b shows the relationship between the 
eff ective indices of refraction and the size D at 10 GHz, in which 
three orthogonal polarizations of incident waves (P1, P2, P3) have 
been considered. We observe clearly that the same electromagnetic 
responses are obtained for the polarizations P2 and P3, wiTha little 
diff erence for the polarization P1. When D varies from 0 to 2.9 mm, 
the refractive index changes from 1.63 to 1.15 for the P2 and P3 
polarizations, whereas it changes from 1.63 to 1.20 for the P1 polarization. The small diff erence can be ignored and the 3 × 3 × 3 mm 3
unit cells can be approximately regarded as isotropic. Similarly, the 
3 × 3 × 1 mm 3
 unit cells also have the approximately isotropic property, 
as shown in Figure 2c . If D varies from 2 to 2.8 mm, the refractive 
index changes from 1.15 to 1.07. 
 On the basis of the above-mention
 On the basis of the above-mentioned analysis, the part of the 
3D cloak whose refractive indices are larger than 1.15 is fabricated 
using the 3 × 3 × 3 mm 3
 unit cells wiThdiff erent-diameter holes, and
the other part whose refractive indices are smaller than 1.15 is 
fabricated using the 3 × 3 × 1 mm 3
 unit cells wiThdiff erent-diameter 
holes. In realization, the 3 × 3 × 3 mm 3
 unit cells are obtained by stacking three-layered standard F4B dielectric plates together and the 
3 × 3 × 1 mm 3
 unit cells are obtained from a single standard F4B plate. 
The fabricated 3D cloak is illustrated in Figure 1a – c , which contains 
17 layers of drilled-hole F4B plates. The detailed realization of the 
3D cloak is presented in Methods and is shown in Supplementary 
Figure S2.

Continuous-material equivalence . In the designs presented above, 
we make use of the drilled-hole metamaterials to realize the continuous-material properties required by the 3D cloak. To illustrate the 
equivalence between continuous materials and actual drilled-hole 
metamaterials, the best way is to simulate the ideal 3D cloak composed of continuous materials and the experimental 3D cloak composed of drilled-hole metamaterials simultaneously and to compare 
their electromagnetic properties. However, the full-wave simulation 
of the experimental 3D cloak is impossible using the current computer, owing to the extremely large memory requirement and computing time. Instead, we make full-wave simulations to a dielectric 
plate, which can be regarded as one layer of the 3D cloak. 
 Consider a circular dielectric plate whose radius and thickness
are 62.5 mm and 3 mm, respectively. The dielectric plate is composed 
of continuous materials and the distribution of refractive index is 
given by n = (2.6 – r2
 / R2
 ) 1 / 2 , in which 0 < r < R and R = 62.5 mm. When 
the continuous-material plate is inserted in a planar waveguide, it is 
equivalent to a TE-polarized 2D problem. We perform a full-wave 
simulation using the finite-element method to investigate the electromagnetic properties. Figure 3a illustrates the electric-field distribution inside and outside the continuous-material plate under the 
excitation of a 2D point source at 10 GHz. 
On the other hand, we make use of the drilled-hole metamaterials to realize the continuous-material plate using the 3 × 3 × 3 mm 3
unit cells, in which totally 1,310 inhomogenous holes are drilled 
on a 3 mm-thick F4B dielectric plate wiTha relative permittivity of 
2.65. From Figure 2b (P1 polarization), when the hole diameter varies from 0.6 mm (for the central hole) to 2.7 mm (for the boundary 
holes), we can obtain the same distribution of the eff ective index of 
refraction as that of the continuous-material plate. Under the same 
condition, we perform the full-wave simulation of the drilled-hole 
structure using finite-element method, and the simulation result of
electric fields inside and outside the drilled-hole metamaterial plate 
is shown in Figure 3b . Excellent agreement is observed for electric 
fields boThinside and outside the plate by comparing Figure 3a and b . 
Hence, the drilled-hole metamaterials have nearly the same electromagnetic properties as the continuous materials. In the other words, 
the drilled-hole metamaterials used in the experimental 3D cloak 
do have the bulk material behaviours that are expected by an ideal 
3D cloak.
Experiment setup . To verify the cloaking performance of the 
designed 3D ground-plane cloak, we set up an experiment system 
in a fully anechoic chamber to measure the scattering behaviours of 
a fl at ground plane, the ground plane wiThthe cone-shaped perturbation and the ground plane wiThthe perturbation and cloak. In 
experiments, the ground plane is a copperplate wiThthe size of 
55 × 40 cm 2
 . Figure 4a – c shows the measurement system. A metamaterial lens antenna is used to transmit a narrow-beam plane wave 
in the near-field region, and a normal X-band rectangular horn 
antenna located in the other side of the anechoic chamber is used 
to receive the far-region scattered fields. The bricks used to support 
the antenna, ground plane and 3D cloak are made of foam, 
which has nearly the same index of refraction as the air, and hence 
has little eff ect on measurements. Owing to the rotating symmetrical property of the 3D cloak, we perform the measurements 
in the x – z plane ( ϕ = 0, see Supplementary Fig. S1 ). The incident 
direction of the metamaterial transmitter is arbitrarily chosen as 
θ = − 45 ° wiThrespect to the ground and is fixed, and the whole 
system rotates around the y axis to get varying receiving directions 
( θ = − 90 to 90 ° ).
 In experiments, the metamaterial transmitter has an important 
role. As the measured objects (ground plane, perturbation and 
3D cloak) have relatively small sizes, the refl ecting and scattering properties cannot be well captured under the illumination of
conventional horn antenna in the far-field region, which radiates 
the approximate plane wave wiThwide beam. Here, we designed a 
gradient index metamaterial lens antenna ( Fig. 4b ) fed by a circular horn and rectangular waveguide ( Fig. 4d ) as the transmitter, in 
which the lens aperture is 98 mm. As the metamaterial antenna can 
produce a narrow-beam plane wave in the near-field region, it is an 
excellent candidate to measure the refl ecting property of the ground 
plane wiThfinite size and the scattering property of the bump. The 
metamaterial lens was made of inhomogeneous closed-square rings 
(CSR), which are non-resonant metamaterial unit cells. By adjusting 
the size of CSR, we are able to control the refractive index to achieve 
the gradient index lens. Owing to the non-resonant nature, the lens 
antenna has a broadband, which works from 8 GHz to 12 GHz, covering the whole X-band. Simulation and experimental results show 
that the lens antenna radiates perfect plane waves and has high gains 
in boThE-plane and H-plane. The detailed design, simulations and 
measurements of the metamaterial lens antenna are presented in 
Methods and are shown in Supplementary Figures S3 – S7
Observation of cloaking eff ect . To observe the cloaking eff ect 
clearly, three kinds of measurements are taken in the experiments: 
the fl at ground plane, the ground plane wiThcone-shaped perturbation (the bump) and the ground plane wiThboThperturbation and 
3D cloak, as illustrated in Figure 5a – c , respectively. We expect that 
the measured scattering property of the ground plane wiThperturbation ( Fig. 5b ) is significantly distinct to that of the ground plane 
( Fig. 5a ), whereas the measured scattering property of the ground 
plane wiThboThperturbation and cloak ( Fig. 5c ) is nearly the same 
as that of ground plane. 
Two polarizations of incident waves have been considered in the 
measurement: the incident electric field is parallel to the x – z plane 
(parallel polarization) and perpendicular to the x – z plane (perpendicular polarization). Such polarizations can be achieved by adjusting the feeding rectangular waveguide of the metamaterial lens. We 
have measured the scattered electric fields of the fl at ground plane, 
the ground plane wiThperturbation and the plane wiThboThperturbation and cloak at 9 GHz, 10 GHz and 12 GHz, respectively. 
Numerical simulations of the three situations are also provided, in 
which the 3D cloak is modelled by continuous materials. All simulations were performed using the full-wave commercial soft ware 
(Microwave Studio, Computer Simulation Technology). We remark 
that the metamaterial lens antenna was considered in the full-wave 
simulations, in which the gradient index lens is also modelled by 
continuous materials. 
 For the parallel-polarization incidence, the simulated and measured results are shown in Figure 6 . Good agreements between 
measurements ( Fig. 6g – i ) and simulations ( Fig. 6a – c ) are clearly
observed at 10 GHz, which confirms the equivalence of the drilled-hole metamaterials and the continuous materials. As the 3D cloak 
is made of layered F4B dielectric plates, it is expected to exhibit 
a large frequency range of operation. This was confirmed by our 
measurements in the frequency range 9 – 12 GHz. From Figure 6a, 
d, g and j , the fl at ground plane produces a single-peak refl ection at 
the mirror-refl ecting direction of the incident wave. However, the 
presence of the cone-shaped metallic perturbation generates considerable scattering wiThmulti-peak refl ections, as shown in Figure 
6b, e, h and k . When the perturbation is covered by the designed 
3D cloak, however, the single-peak refl ection is restored as if the 
ground plane were fl at, as shown in Figure 6c, f, i and l . It is obvious 
that good cloaking eff ects are achieved using the 3D cloak in a broad 
frequency band for the parallel polarization. Figure 7 illustrates the 
simulated and measured results for the three situations as the incident electric field is perpendicular-polarized, and similarly good 
cloaking performance are observed.

Figure 1 | Three-dimensional microwave ground-plane cloak and its 
refractive index distribution. ( a ) Top view of the cloak. ( b ) Bottom view of 
the cloak. ( c ) Side view of the cloak. ( d ) The distribution of refractive index 
in the x – z plane. The material parameters of the whole cloak are obtained 
by rotating the x- to z -plane pattern around the z axis.

Figure 2 | Unit cells used in the design of the cloak and the relation of 
geometry to electric field polarization. ( a ) The designed ground-plane 
cloak. ( b ) The 3 × 3 × 3 mm 3
 drilled-hole unit cell, in which a = 3 mm, and the 
relations between effective index of refraction and unit-cell geometry for 
different polarized incident electric fields at 10 GHz. P1, P2 and P3 are three 
orthogonal polarizations, E and H are the electric and magnetic field and 
k is the wave vector of the incident radiation. ( c ) The 3 × 3 × 1 mm 3
 drilledhole unit cell, in which a = 3 mm, b = 3 mm and c = 1 mm, and the relations 
between effective index of refraction and unit-cell geometry for different 
polarized incident electric fields at 10 GHz.

 Figure 3 | Full-wave simulation results of electric fields inside and 
outside the metamaterials. The calculations are performed for the 
circular continuous-material and drilled-hole metamaterial plates 
under the excitation of a 2D point source at 10 GHz. BoThplates have a 
radius of 62.5 mm and a thickness of 3 mm, and are placed in a planar 
waveguide. Hence, the simulations can be performed using 2D models 
(TE polarization). ( a ) Continuous-material plate. ( b ) Drilled-hole 
metamaterial plate.

Figure 4 | Measurement system of the 3D ground-plane cloak. A metamaterial lens antenna is used to transmit a narrow-beam plane wave in the 
near-field region, and a normal X-band rectangular horn antenna is used 
to receive the far-field scattered electric fields. ( a ) The demonstration 
of measurement. ( b ) The sketch of the metamaterial gradient index lens 
antenna. The green surface is made of metamaterials. ( c ) The actual 
measurement system in a fully anechoic chamber. ( d ) The photograph of 
the metamaterial antenna.

 Figure 5 | Three situations for measurements and simulations and the 
predicted far-field patterns. ( a ) The fl at ground plane, wiTha single-peak 
refl ection at the mirror-refl ecting direction of the incident wave. ( b ) The 
ground plane wiTha cone-shaped metallic perturbation, wiThmulti-peak 
refl ections. ( c ) The ground plane wiThboThperturbation and 3D cloak, wiTh
a single-peak refl ection at the mirror-refl ecting direction of the incident 
wave. The electric field amplitude in the top half of the panels is normalized 
to unity.

 Figure 6 | The simulated and measured electric fields in the far region.
The fields are shown at different frequencies under the incidence of 
parallel-polarized electric field emitted from the metamaterial lens 
antenna. θ is the incidence angle, whereas the electric field amplitudes 
are normalized to unity. ( a – c ) Simulated results for the three situations 
at 10 GHz. ( d – f ) Measured results for the three situations at 9 GHz. ( g – i ) 
Measured results for the three situations at 10 GHz. ( j – l ) Measured results 
for the three situations at 12 GHz.

Figure 7 | The simulated and measured electric fields in the far region.
The fields are shown at different frequencies under the incidence of 
perpendicular-polarized electric field emitted from the metamaterial lens 
antenna. θ is the incidence angle, whereas the electric field amplitudes 
are normalized to unity. ( a – c ) Simulated results for the three situations 
at 10 GHz. ( d – f ) Measured results for the three situations at 9 GHz. ( g – i ) 
Measured results for the three situations at 10 GHz. ( j – l ) Measured results 
for the three situations at 12 GHz.